chore(docs): New "Creating a Source Plugin" tutorial (#37538)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/tutorial/creating-a-source-plugin/part-6/index.mdx

---
title: "Part 6: Image CDN"
---

import { LinkButton } from "gatsby-interface"
import Collapsible from "@components/collapsible"
import { MdArrowForward } from "react-icons/md"

## Introduction

> Gatsby always had best-in-class image support with its [`gatsby-plugin-image`](/plugins/gatsby-plugin-image/) feature. With it you can easily add responsive, optimized images to sites in all modern formats. Traditionally, images were downloaded and transformed to enable this behavior. Image CDN solves this by skipping image processing during the build, and instead deferring and offloading it to a dedicated image CDN. Visitors still get images in the most optimized formats such as AVIF and WebP, but site builds complete in a fraction of the time.

Reviewer: Should this be present tense? 
```suggestion
Gatsby has best-in-class image support with its [`gatsby-plugin-image`](/plugins/gatsby-plugin-image/) feature. With it you can easily add responsive, optimized images to sites in all modern formats. Traditionally, images were downloaded and transformed to enable this behavior. Image CDN solves this by skipping image processing during the build, and instead deferring and offloading it to a dedicated image CDN. Visitors still get images in the most optimized formats such as AVIF and WebP, but site builds complete in a fraction of the time.
```

By the end of this part of the tutorial, you will be able to:

- Add Image CDN support to your source plugin
- Use Image CDN with `gatsby-plugin-image` in your example site

## Add Image CDN to your plugin

> Gatsby's Image CDN feature can be added to any Gatsby source plugin. We'd recommend using it over manual file downloading for the reasons above. As long as your API gives back an URL to an image, you should be able to implement the required code. Basically, for Image CDN to work you need two things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby's Image CDN feature can be added to any Gatsby source plugin. We recommend using it over manual file downloading for the reasons above. As long as your API gives back a URL to an image, you should be able to implement the required code. Basically, for Image CDN to work you need two things:
```

<Announcement>

**Pro tip:** Gatsby's Image CDN feature is smart enough to work on all platforms, even if no CDN provider like on Gatsby Cloud or Netlify is available. In those cases (including locally on your computer) it automatically falls back to processing images during the build. This won't give users a build improvement but things on the frontend will still behave the same and builds won't fail.

</Announcement>

The `RemoteFile` interface has the following shape:

```graphql
interface RemoteFile {
  id: ID!
  mimeType: String!
  filename: String!
  filesize: Int
  width: Int
  height: Int
  publicUrl: String!
  resize(/* args */): RemoteFileResize
  gatsbyImage(/* args */): GatsbyImageData
}
```

For node types implementing `RemoteFile` this means:

- Always required are `publicUrl` (the url to the image/file), [`mimeType`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_Types) (e.g. `image/jpg` or `application/pdf`), and `filename`. `publicUrl` will be defined through `url` during node creation.

> - `width`, `height`, `resize`, and `gatsbyImage` can be null. This is because the `RemoteFile` interface can also handle assets other than images, like PDFs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `width`, `height`, `resize`, and `gatsbyImage` can be null. This is because the `RemoteFile` interface can also handle assets other than images, like PDFs.
```

> So for node types that are images this means: `publicUrl`, `mimeType`, `filename`, `width`, and `height` are mandatory.

Reviewer: Possible edit for brevity:

```suggestion
For node types that are images this means: `publicUrl`, `mimeType`, `filename`, `width`, and `height` are mandatory.
```

        id: ID!
        _id: Int!
        slug: String!
        title: String!
        author: ${NODE_TYPES.Author} @link(by: "name")
    // highlight-next-line
        image: ${NODE_TYPES.Asset} @link
      }

      type ${NODE_TYPES.Author} implements Node {
        id: ID!
        _id: Int!
        name: String!
      }

      type ${NODE_TYPES.Asset} implements Node & RemoteFile {
        url: String!
        alt: String!
        width: Int!
        height: Int!
      }
    `)
    ```

    If you remember from Part 3, the default behavior of `@link` is to use the `id` from the target node. Keep that in mind for the following instructions.

1. Open the `plugin/src/source-nodes.ts` file and add a return statement to the `createAssetNode` function. Return the generated `id`:

    ```ts:title=plugin/src/source-nodes.ts
    export function createAssetNode(
      gatsbyApi: SourceNodesArgs,
      data: IPostImageInput
    ) {
      const id = gatsbyApi.createNodeId(`${NODE_TYPES.Asset}-${data.url}`)

      const assetNode = {/* Contents */} satisfies IRemoteImageNodeInput

      gatsbyApi.actions.createNode(assetNode)

      // highlight-next-line
      return id
    }
    ```

> 1. A node of type `Post` should have the generated `id` of `Asset` as its `image` field. Because only posts can have images. You can conditionally add data to the node if certain contiditions are met like this:

Reviewer: Small typo and suggestion to reword:
```suggestion
1. A node of type `Post` should have the generated `id` of `Asset` as its `image` field. Because only posts can have images, you can conditionally add data to the node if certain conditions are met like this:
```

          {/* highlight-start */}
          <div className="image">
            <GatsbyImage
              alt={post.image.alt}
              image={getImage(post.image.gatsbyImage)}
            />
          </div>
          {/* highlight-end */}
        </main>
      )
    }

    // Rest of file
    ```

1. Go to `http://localhost:8000/post-1/`. You should see a dog image on the page:

    ![A screenshot of "http://localhost:8000/post-1/" in a web browser. The individual post page for "The first post" is shown, together with a corgi dog looking at the camera. The dog is smiling.](./image-cdn-on-page.png)

## Summary

Magnificent! Your posts now have photos of cute dogs.

Take a moment to think back on what you've learned so far. Challenge yourself to answer the following questions from memory:

- What are the two steps required to implement Image CDN in a source plugin?
- What types of files can `RemoteFile` support?
- What are the mandatory fields that `RemoteFile` expects?

### Key takeaways

- By using Image CDN you can offload the heavy image generation to dedicated providers, giving users of your source plugin great build performance.

> - GraphQL root node types of your plugin that represent files and/or images, should implement the `RemoteFile` interface and have all required fields on their node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- GraphQL root node types of your plugin that represent files and/or images should implement the `RemoteFile` interface and have all required fields on their node.
```
